---
tags:
topic: "sec_iam"
subTopic: "tokens"
source: "CompTIA"
family:  "sec_fundamentals"
imageNameKey: "SecPlus_tokens" 
cert: "Sec+"
---
# Authentication Tokens
> *Creation Date:* `=this.file.cday`
> *Last Modified:* `=this.file.mday`

# Hard Authentication Tokens

Hard authentication tokens enhance security by leveraging physical devices that users must possess to authenticate. These devices generate or store authentication tokens, contributing to a multifactor authentication strategy. Here's a breakdown of the main types of token generation and the devices used for hard token authentication.

## Token Generation Methods

### Certificate-Based Authentication
- **Mechanism**: Uses a private key to generate a signed token, verified by the public key.
- **Drawback**: Requires implementing Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for issuing digital certificates.

### One-Time Password (OTP)
- **Mechanism**: Generates tokens via a hash function on a shared secret and a synchronization seed (timestamp for TOTP or HMAC for HOTP).
- **Advantage**: Eliminates the need for PKI by using key pairs and hashing.

### Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Universal 2nd Factor (U2F)
- **Mechanism**: Utilizes a public/private key pair, with the private key locked to the device.
- **Advantage**: Avoids shared secrets, enhancing security without relying on PKI.

## Hard Token Devices

### Smart Cards
- **Functionality**: Store digital certificates and private keys, secured by a PIN.
- **Types**: Include both physical contact and contactless (NFC) variants.

### OTP Tokens
- **Description**: Cryptoprocessors that generate readable codes for the user, requiring no computer interface.
- **Use Case**: Provides a straightforward method for producing time-sensitive authentication tokens.

### Security Keys
- **Description**: Portable hardware security modules (HSM) that support U2F, certificate-based authentication, or HOTP/TOTP.
- **Features**: May include activation buttons or biometric readers for enhanced security.

## Considerations and Risks

- **Static Tokens**: Simpler devices transmitting programmed static codes, like those used in building entry systems, are susceptible to cloning and replay attacks.
- **Security Balance**: While providing an additional layer of security, hard tokens must be managed carefully to prevent loss or theft, which could compromise the authentication process.

Hard authentication tokens represent a critical component of robust security architectures, offering an effective way to implement ownership factors in authentication protocols. Their use in combination with other authentication factors can significantly reduce the risk of unauthorized access.

# Soft Authentication Tokens

- **Description**: Tokens generated via a software mechanism such as SMS or an application
- **Mechanism**: Generated by the IdP and transmitted to the supplicant.
- **Security**: SMS are weaker, with software applications such as apps more secure as they are installed on a device that itself likely requires authentication. 